## Introduction

The concept of an algorithm becomes more relevant with the precise use of variables in mathematics. It has been noted that due to the huge size of biological data, the problems in bioinformatics require a wide range of computational power to solve the problems in bioinformatics. Algorithms function as a key to open the various problems in a bioinformatics approach and applications. It is important to evaluate how the basic algorithm in bioinformatics defines the problems in biology, such as in molecular biology, and to understand the methodology approaches in designing the algorithms and to fix the weakness for a better outcome. In biology, with the advances in X-ray structure analysis, a large amount of data and structural features regarding biological sequences have been identified for further analysis. Bioinformatics applications such as algorithms aid in studying sequence and structure alignments, predicting protein structure, classifying protein function, and modelling homologous proteins for progressive applications in life science research.


## Theory
An algorithm is defined as a set of sequential instructions that one must perform for solving a well-formulated problem. Considering a Protein or a nucleotide sequence, it is important to find the similarity matches for predicting the functional role, features and structural aspects. Sequence alignment generally describes the comparison of sequence with several methods for sequence analysis in a better way. The accuracy of sequence alignment determines the subsequent analyses for phylogeny prediction, genomics studies and structure and function prediction and for identifying conserved regions. In biological research, sequence analysis helps in drug discovery process, pathogen detection and identification of common genes. The basic algorithm in bioinformatics employs techniques for efficiently finding optimal alignments. 

In Pairwise Sequence Alignment the similarity regions are identified for mapping functions, structure and evolutionary relationships between two biological sequences of interest. There are different algorithms associated with pairwise sequence alignment like the Brute Force algorithm, Dotplot, Needlemann Wunsch algorithm, Smith Watermann algorithm etc.. Brute force algorithm is the straightforward approach for solving a problem that included direct computation and problem statement based on concepts. It is the simplest string comparison algorithm that determines whether two equal length sequences are identical or not. Brute force approach can also be called as exhaustive search for solving small size instance of problem. It is important for both educational and theoretical purposes. The implementation of Brute force algorithm is the simplest approach, and it can be only applied to problems with smaller input size. Dot plot represents a graphical method for comparing two biological sequences for identifying regions of close similarity between them.  It is a simple method for comparing two sequences, either DNA or protein, and is probably the oldest way of comparing biological sequences. Dot plot creates two-dimensional graph for showing comparison of two sequences. 

Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) represents the alignment of three or more biological sequences of similar length. It is useful in molecular biology to study evolutionary relationships and there exists many algorithms for studying the sequence alignment. Scoring scheme in algorithm represent a set of rules that assigns the alignment score to any given alignment of two sequences. A gap in the matrix corresponds to an insertion or a deletion of a biological residue. The Needleman-Wunsch algorithm is an example of dynamic programming. It is appropriate for finding alignment of sequences of similar length. 


